
CALLIMACHUS, HYMNS 1-3 - Theoi Classical Texts Library

.

Toggle navigation
Theoi Project - Classical Texts
Library

LIBRARY HOME
GREEK MYTHOLOGY
GREEK GODS

Olympian Gods
Primordial Gods
Titan Gods
Sky Gods
Sea Gods
Rustic Gods
Underworld Gods
Daemones-Spirits
Nymphs
more >>

BESTIARY
HEROES
MISCELLANY

Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z
Family Tree of the Gods
Legendary Tribes
Legendary Creatures
Star Myths
Plant & Flower Myths

GALLERY

Classical Texts
Library >> Callimachus, Hymns >> Hymns
1-3
CALLIMACHUS, HYMNS 1 - 3

CALLIMACHUS OF CYRENE was a Greek poet and scholar of the Library of Alexandria who flourished in the C3rd B.C.
He was the author of a large number of works, of which only 6 hymns and 63 epigrams still survive in their
entirety.

Callimachus, Hymns and Epigrams. Lycophron. Aratus. Translated by Mair, A. W. & G. R. Loeb Classical
Library Volume 129. London: William Heinemann, 1921.

This volume is still in print and available new from Amazon.com (click on image right for details). In addition
to the translation of Callimachus' Hymns and Epigrams the book contains Lycophron's riddling
poem Alexandra, Aratus' description of the stars, source Greek texts and Mair's introduction, index and
footnotes.

Some more recent translations of Callimachus and commentaries on his work appear in the booklist (left below).

HYMNS CONTENTS

HYMNS 1 - 3

1. To Zeus

2. To Apollo

3. To Artemis

HYMNS 4 - 6

4. To Delos

5. The Bath of Pallas

6. To Demeter

HYMNS 1 - 3, TRANSLATED BY A. W. MAIR
HYMN I. TO ZEUS

[1] At libations to Zeus what else should rather be sung than the god himself, mighty for ever, king for
evermore, router of the Pelagonians, dealer of justice to the sons of Heaven?

[4] How shall we sing of him – as lord of Dicte1 or of Lycaeum?2 My soul is all in doubt, since debated is his birth. O Zeus, some say that thou wert
born on the hills of Ida3; others, O Zeus, say in Arcadia; did these or those, O
Father lie? “Cretans are ever liars.”4 Yea, a tomb,5 O Lord, for thee the Cretans builded; but thou didst not die, for thou art for ever.

[10] In Parrhasia6 it was that Rheia bare thee, where was a hill sheltered with
thickest brush. Thence is the place holy, and no fourfooted thing that hath need of Eileithyia7 nor any woman approacheth thereto, but the Apidanians8
call it the primeval childbed of Rheia. There when thy mother had laid thee down from her mighty lap,
straightway she sought a stream of water, wherewith she might purge her of the soilure of birth and wash thy
body therein.

[17] But mighty Ladon9 flowed not yet, nor Erymanthus,9 clearest of rivers; waterless was all Arcadia; yet was it anon to be called
well-watered. For all that time when Rhea loosed her girdle, full many a hollow oak did water Iaon9 bear aloft, and many a wain did Melas10 carry and many
a serpent above Carnion,11 wet though it now be, cast its lair; and a man would
fare on foot over Crathis12 and many-pebbled Metope,13 athirst: while that abundant water lay beneath his feet.

[28] And holden in distress the lady Rheia said, "Dear Earth, give birth thou also! They birthpangs are
light." So spake the goddess, and lifting her great arm aloft she smote the mountain with her staff; and it
was greatly rent in twain for her and poured forth a mighty flood. Therein, O Lord, she cleansed they body; and
swaddled thee, and gave thee to Neda to carry within the Cretan covert, that thou mightst be reared secretly:
Neda,14 eldest of the nymphs who then were about her bed, earliest birth after
Styx15 and Philyra.16 And no idle favour did the
goddess repay her, but named that stream Neda17; which, I ween, in great flood by
the very city of the Cauconians,18 which is called Lepreion,19 mingles its stream with Nereus,20 and its primeval
water do the son’s son of the Bear,21 Lycaon’s daughter, drink.

[42] When the nymph, carrying thee, O Father Zeus, towards Cnosus,22 was leaving
Thenae22– for Thenae as nigh to Cnosus – even then, O God, thy navel
fell away: hence that plain the Cydonians23 call the Plain of the Navel.24 But thee, O Zeus, the companions of the Cyrbantes25
took to their arms, even the Dictaean Meliae,26 and Adrasteia27 laid thee to rest in a cradle of gold, and thou didst suck the rich teat of the
she-goat Amaltheia,28 and thereto eat the sweet honey-comb. For suddenly on the
hills of Ida, which men call Panacra,29 appeared the works of the Panacrian bee.
And lustily round thee danced the Curetes30 a war-dance,31 beating their armour, that Cronus might hear with his ears the din of the shield,
but not thine infant noise.

[54] Fairly didst thou wax, O heavenly Zeus, and fairly wert thou nurtured, and swiftly thou didst grow to
manhood, and speedily came the down upon thy cheek. But, while yet a child, thou didst devise all the deeds of
perfect stature. Wherefore thy kindred, though an earlier generation, grudged not that thou shouldst have heaven
for thine appointed habitation.32 For they said that the lot assigned to the sons
of Cronus their three several abodes.33 But who would draw lots for Olympos and
for Hades – save a very fool? For equal chances should one cast lots; but these are the wide world apart.
When I speak fiction, be it such fiction as persuades the listener’s ear! Thou wert made sovereign of the
gods not by casting of lots by the deeds of thy hands, thy might and that strength34 which thou hast set beside thy throne. And the most excellent of birds35 didst thou make the messenger of thy sings; favourable to my friends be the sings
thou showest! And thou didst choose that which is most excellent among men – not thou the skilled in
ships, nor the wielder of the shield, nor the minstrel: these didst thou straightway renounce to lesser gods,
other cares to others. But thou didst choose the rulers of cities themselves, beneath whose hand is the lord of
the soil, the skilled in spearmanship, the oarsman, yea, all things that are: what is there that is not under
the ruler’s sway? Thus, smith, we say, belong to Hephaestus; to Ares, warriors; to Artemis of the
Tunic,36 huntsmen; to Phoebus they that know well the strains of the lyre. But
from Zeus come kings; for nothing is diviner than the kings of Zeus. Wherefore thou didst choose them for thine
own lot, and gavest them cities to guard. And thou didst seat thyself in the high places of the cities, watching
who rule their people with crooked judgements, and who rule otherwise. And thou hast bestowed upon them wealth
and prosperity abundantly; unto all, but not in equal measure. One may well judge by our Ruler,37 for he hath clean outstripped all others. At evening he accomplisheth what whereon
he thinketh in the morning; yea, at evening the greatest things, but the lesser soon as he thinketh on them. But
the others accomplish some things in a year, and some things not in one; of others, again, thou thyself dost
utterly frustrate the accomplishing and thwartest their desire.

[90] Hail! greatly hail! most high Son of Cronus, giver of good things, giver of safety. Thy works who could
sing? There hath not been, there shall not be, who shall sing the works of Zeus. Hail! Father, hail again! And
grant us goodness and prosperity. Without goodness wealth cannot bless men, nor goodness without prosperity.
Give us goodness and weal.

1. Mountain in Crete.

2. Mountain in Arcadia.

3. This proverbial saying, attributed to Epimenides, is quoted by St. Paul. Ep. Tit. i. 12,
“One of themselves, a prophet of their own, said, The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, idle
bellies” (kata thêria, gasteres argai), and seems to be alluded to by Aratus,
Phaen. 30 ei eteon dê. The explanation given by Athenodorus of Eretria ap.
Ptolem. Hephaest. In Photii Bibl. p. 150 Bekk. Is that Thetis and Medea, having a dispute as to which
of them was the fairer, entrusted the decision to Idomeneus of Crete. He decided in favour of Thetis, whereon
Medea said, “Cretans are always liars” and cursed them that they should never speak the truth. The
schol. On the present passage says that Idomeneus divided the spoils of Troy unfairly.

4. The Cretan legend was that Zeus was a prince who was slain by a wild boar and buried in
Crete. His tomb was variously localized and the tradition of “the tomb of Zeus” attaches to several
places even in modern times, especially to Mount Iuktas. See A. B. Cook, Zeus, vol. i. p. 157 ff.

5. Arcadia.

6. Cf. Apoll. Rh. iv. 1240.

7. Goddess of birth.

8. The ancient Arcadians (schol.).

9. River in Arcadia.

10. Melas: Dion. Per. 415 ff. Arkades Apidanêes hupo skopiên Erumanthou, entha
Melas, othi Krathis, ina rheei hugros Idaôn, êchi kai ôgugios mêkunetai udasi
Ladôn. Herodot. i. 145 has Ôlenos en tô Peiros potamos megas estia. Strabo 386
has Ôlenos, par’ on potramos megas Melas where it has been proposed to read par’
on <Peiros> and to omit Melas. M. T. Smiley, in Classical Qu. v. (1911)
p. 89 f., suggests that the Styx is meant, which supplies the waterfall near Nonacris in North Arcadia and later
becomes a tributary of the Crathis (Paus. viii. 18. 4). When Leake discovered the waterfall in 1806 the natives
did not know the name Styx for it but called it the Black Water (Mavro nero) or the Dragon Water. The name
Peiros in any case suggests a connexion with the underworld.

11. Carnion or Carion, river in Arcadia, Paus. viii. 34.

12. Crathis, river in Arcadia (and Achaea), Paus. vii. 25. 11, viii. 15. 5, viii. 18. 4.

13. Metope, river in Arcadia.

14. Cf. Paus. iv. 33. 1, “The Messenians say that Zeus was reared among them
and that his nurses were Ithome and Neda, after whom the river got its name.” Cf. viii. 38
ff.

15. Styx, daughter of Oceanus and Tethys, Hesiod, Th. 361.

16. Philyra, daughter of Oceanus, mother of Cheiron by Cronus.

17. Paus. iv. 20. 2. The river Neda rises in Mount Lycaeon, flows into Messenia and forms the
boundary between Messenia and Elis. Cf. Strabo 348 who says it rises in Lycaeon from a spring which
Rheia caused to flow in order to wash the infant Zeus.

18. A people of Triphylia, Hom. Od. iii. 366.

19. Herod. iv. 148 says that Lepreon in Triphylia was founded by the Minyae after driving out
the Cauconians.

20. i.e. the sea.

21. Arcas, the ancestor of the Arcadians, was the son of Zeus and
Lycaon’s daughter Callisto who was changed into a bear.

22. Town in Crete.

23. Cydonia, town in Crete.

24. Schol. Nicand. Alex. 7 Omphalos gar topos en Krêtê, hôs kai
Kallimachos pege . . . Kudônes. Diodor. v. 70 tells the story (he says that Zeus was carried by the
Curetes) and gives the name of the place as Omphalos and of the plain around as Omphaleion.

25. Corybantes.

26. The ash-tree nymphs, cf. Hesiod. Th. 187.

27. Cf. Apoll. Rh. iii. 132 ff. Dios perikalles athurma | keino, to oi poise
philê trophos Adrêsteia | antrô en Idaiô eti nêpia kourixonti | sphairan
eutrochalon; i.q. Nemesis, sister of the Curetes (schol.).

28. The nymph of she-goat who suckled Zeus; Diodor. v. 70, Apollod. 1. 5, schol. Arat. 161.
Ovid, Fast. i. 115 ff.

29. Mountains in Crete (Steph. Byz. s.v. Panakra). Zeus rewarded the bees by making
them of a golden bronze colour and rendering them insensible to the rigours of the mountain climate (Diodor. v.
70).

30. Apollodor. i. 4, “The Curetes in full armour, guarding the infant in the cave, beat
their shields with their spears that Cronus might not hear the child’s voice.”

31. prulis, the Cyprian name for the purrhichê
(Aristotle fr. 476, schol. Pind. P. ii. 127) or dance in armour (Pollux iv. 96 and 99); see
Classical Qu. xxxii. p. 131.

32. This has been supposed to refer to the fact that Ptolemy Philadelphus was the youngest of
the sons of Ptolemy Soter.

33. Homer, Il. xv. 187 ff.; cf. Apollodor. i. 7, Pind O. vii. 54 ff.

34. Bia and Cratos appear as personification of the might and majesty of Zeus in Aeschylus,
P.V., Hesiod, Th. 385, etc.

35. The eagle.

36. Artemis Chitone (Chitonea, Athen. 629 c), so called from the tunic (chiton) in which as
huntress she was represented; not, as the schol. Says, from the Attic deme Chitone.

37. Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, 285-247 B.C.

HYMN II. TO APOLLO

[1] How the laurel branch of Apollo trembles! How trembles all the shrine! Away, away, he that is sinful! Now
surely Phoebus knocketh at the door with his beautiful foot. See’st thou not? The Delian palm1 nods pleasantly of a sudden and the swan2 in the air
sings sweetly. Of yourselves now ye bolts be pushed back, pushed back of yourselves, ye bars! The god is no
longer far away. And ye, young men, prepare ye for song and for the dance.

[9] Not unto everyone doth Apollo appear, but unto him that is good. Whoso hath seen Apollo, he is great; whoso
hath not seen him, he is of low estate. We shall see thee, O Archer, and we shall never be lowly. Let no the
youths keep silent lyre or noiseless step, when Apollo visits3 his shrine, if they
think to accomplish marriage and to cut the locks of age,4 and if the wall is to
stand upon its old foundations. Well done the youths, for that the shell5 is no
longer idle.

[17] Be hushed, ye that hear, at the song to Apollo; yea, hushed is even the sea when the minstrels celebrate
the lyre or the bow, the weapons of Lycoreian Phoebus.6 Neither doth Thetis his
mother wail her dirge for Achilles, when she hears Hië7
Paeëon, Hië Paeëon.

[22] Yea, the tearful rock defers its pain, the wet stone is set in Phrygia, a marble rock like a woman8 open-mouthed in some sorrowful utterance. Say ye Hië! Hië! an ill
thing it is strive with the Blessed Ones. He who fights with the Blessed Ones would fight with my King9; he who fights with my King, would fight even with Apollo. Apollo will honour the
choir, since it sings according to his heart; for Apollo hath power, for that he sitteth on the right hand of
Zeus. Nor will the choir sing of Phoebus for one day only. He is a copious theme of song; who would not readily
sing of Phoebus?

[32] Golden is the tunic of Apollo and golden his mantle, his lyre and his Lyctian10 bow and his quiver: golden too are his sandals; for rich in gold is Apollo, rich
also in possessions: by Pytho mightst thou guess. And ever beautiful is he and ever young: never on the girl
cheeks of Apollo hath come so much as the down of manhood. His locks distil fragrant oils upon the ground; not
oil of fat do the locks of Apollo distil but he very Healing of All.11 And in
whatsoever city whose dews fall upon the ground, in that city all things are free from harm.

[42] None is so abundant in skill as Apollo. To him belongs the archer, to him the minstrel; for unto Apollo is
given in keeping alike archery and song. His are the lots of the diviner and his the seers; and from Phoebus do
leeches know the deferring of death.

[47] Phoebus and Nomius12 we call him, ever since that when by Amphrysus13 he tended the yokemares, fired with love of young Admetus.14 Lightly would the herd of cattle wax larger, nor would the she-goats of the flock
lack young, whereon as they feed Apollo casts his eye; nor without milk would the ewes be nor barren, but all
would have lambs at foot; and she that bare one would soon be the mother of twins.

[55] And Phoebus it is that men follow when they map out cities.15 For Phoebus
himself doth weave their foundations. Four years of age was Phoebus when he framed his first foundations in fair
Ortygia16 near the round lake.17

[60] Artemis hunted and brought continually the heads of Cynthian goats and Phoebus plaited an altar.18 With horns builded he the foundations, and of horns framed he the altar, and of
horns were the walls he built around. Thus did Phoebus learn to raise his first foundations. Phoebus, too, it
was told Battus19 of my own city of fertile soil, and in guise of a raven20 – auspicious to our founder – led his people as they entered Libya and
sware that he would vouchsafe a walled city to our kings.21 And the oath of Apollo
is ever sure. O Apollo! Many there be that call thee Boëdromius,22 and many
there be that call thee Clarius23: everywhere is thy name on the lips of many. But
I call thee Carneius24; for such is the manner of my fathers. Sparta, O Carneius!
was they first foundation; and next Thera; but third the city of Cyrene. From Sparta the sixth25 generation of the sons of Oedipus brought thee to their colony of Thera; and from
Thera lusty Aristoteles26 set thee by the Asbystian27 land, and builded thee a shrine exceedingly beautiful, and in the city established
a yearly festival wherein many a bull, O Lord, falls on his haunches for the last time. Hië, Hië,
Carneius! Lord of many prayers, - thine altars wear flowers in spring, even all the pied flowers which
the Hours lead forth when Zephyrus breathes dew, and in winter the sweet crocus. Undying evermore is thy fire,
nor ever doth the ash feed about the coals of yester-even. Greatly, indeed, did Phoebus rejoice as the belted
warriors of Enyo danced with the yellow-haired Libyan women, when the appointed season of the Carnean feast came
round. But not yet could the Dorians approach the fountains of Cyre,28 but dwelt
in Azilis29 thick with wooded dells. These did the Lord himself behold and showed
them to his bride30 as he stood on horned Myrtussa31
where the daughter of Hypseus slew the lion that harried the kind of Eurypylus.32
No other dance more divine hath Apollo beheld, nor to any city hath he given so many blessings as he hath given
to Cyrene, remembering his rape of old. Nor, again, is there any other god whom the sons of Battus have honoured
above Phoebus.

[97] Hië, Hië, Paeëon, we hear – since this refrain did the Delphian folk first
invent, what time thou didst display the archery of they golden bow. As thou wert going down to Pytho, there met
thee a beast unearthly, a dread snake.33 And him thou didst slay, shooting swift
arrows one upon the other; and the folk cried “Hië, Hië, Paeëon, shoot an
arrow!” A helper34 from the first thy mother bare thee, and ever since that
is thy praise.

[105] Spare Envy privily in the ear of Apollo: “I admire not the poet who singeth not things for number
as the sea.”35 Apollon spurned Envy with his foot and spake thus:
“Great is the stream of the Assyrian river,36 but much filth of earth and
much refuse it carries on its waters. And not of every water do the Melissae carry to Deo,37 but of the trickling stream that springs from a holy fountain, pure and undefiled,
the very crown of waters.” Hail, O Lord, but Blame – let him go where Envy dwells!

1. The palm-tree by which Leto supported herself when she bare Apollo.
Cf. H. Delos 210, Hom. H. Apoll. 117, Od. vi. 162 f. Theogn. 5 f. The laurel and the
palm are coupled in Euripides, Hecuba, 458 ff.

2. For the association of the swan with Apollo cf. Hymn to Delos 249; Plato,
Phaedo, 85; Manilius v. 381 "ipse Deum Cygnus condit.”

3. The schol. on v. 12 remarks that Callimachus emphasizes the presence of the God because
“it is said in the case of prophetic gods that the deities are sometimes present
(epidêmein), sometimes absent (apodêmein), and when they are present the oracles
are true, when absent false.” Cf. Pind. P. iv. 5 ouk apodamou Apollônos
tuchontos. The Delphians celebrated the seventh day of the month Bysios – the birthday of Apollo
– when he was supposed to revisit his temple, and the seventh of the holy month (Attic Anthesterion) was
celebrated by the Delians when Apollo was supposed to return to Delos from the land of the Hyperboreans. (W.
Schmidt, Geburstag im Altertum, p. 86.) Cf. Verg. A. iii. 91.

4. i.e. if they are to live to an old age.

5. i.e. the lyre, originally made by Hermes from the shell of a tortoise.
êgasamên = Well done!

6. Lycoreus, by-name of Apollo, from Lycoreia, town on Parnassus above Delphi: Strabo 418. 3
hyperkeitai d’ autês hê Lukôreia eph’ topou proteron hidrunto hoi Delphoi
hyper tou hierou. Legends of its foundation in Pausanias x. 6, 2-3. Ph. Lukôreioio Apoll.
Rh. iv. 1490.

7. Though iê, not hiê, is the usual form, it is perhaps better
here to write the aspirated form to suit the suggested etymology from hiei “shoot.” See vv.
97-104 for the legend.

8. Niobe, daughter of Tantalus, had, according to Hom. Il. xxiv. 602 ff. six sons and
six daughters, who were slain by Apollo and Artemis respectively, because she boasted over their mother Leto,
who had but two children. Niobe was turned into a stone, and this was identified with a rude rock figure on
Mount Sipylos near Smyrna which is still to be seen. The water running down the face of the rock was supposed to
be Niobe’s tears – entha lithos per eousa theôn ek kêdea pessei, Hom.
l.c. 617, cf. “Phrygium silicem,” Stat. S. v. 3. 87.

9. Ptolemy III. Euergetes, according to the schol.

10. Lyctos, town in Crete.

11. As a personification Panaceia appears frequently as the daughter of
Asclepius. In the Hippocratean oath she is named after Apollo, Asclepius and Hygieie. Such
“all-healing” virtue was in early times ascribed to various plants (Panakes Cheirônion,
Aslêpieion, etc.).

12. Cf. Pind. ix. 65.

13. River in Thessaly where Apollo tended the flocks of Admetus. Cf. Verg.
G. iii.2 “pastor ab Amphryso.”

14. King of Pherae in Thessaly.

15. Hence Apollo’s titles Archêgetês, Ktistês, etc.

16. Delos.

17. A lake in Delos. Cf. H. iv. 261, Theognis vii, Apollo is born epi trochoeidei
limnê, and Eur. I.T. 1104.

18. The keratin (Plut. Thes. 21, Dittenb. Syll. No. 588, 172)
bômos keratinos (Plut. Sollert. animal. 35), made entirely of horns, was one of the
Seven Wonders of the World. Cf. Anon. De incredib. 2; Ovid, Her. 21. 99.

19. Battus (Aristoteles), founder of Cyrene, birthplace of Callimachus.

20. The raven was one of the birds sacred to Apollo.

21. The Battiadae.

22. Boëdromius: Et. Mag. s.v. Boêdromiôn. Hoti polemou sustantos
Athênaiois kai Eleusiniois summachêsantos Iônos . . enikêsan Athênaioi. apo oun
tês tou strateumatos boês tês epi to astru dramousês ho te Apollôn
boêdromios eklêthê kai hê thuria kai ho autois ho theos meta boês epithesthai
tois polemiois. Doubtless the Athenians associated the name with help given them by some superhuman
champtions (boêdromoi = boadooi, Pind, N. vii. 31). Mommsen, Feste d. Stadt
Athen, p. 171.

23. Clarius, by-name of Apollo, from Claros near Colophon.

24. Carneius, by-name of Apollo in many Dorian states, as Sparta, Thera, Cyrene.

25. The genealogy is Oedipus – Polyneices – Thersander – Tisamenus –
Autesion – Theras, who led the colony to Thera and who is the sixth descendant of Oedipus according to the
Greek way of reckoning inclusively. Cf. Herod. iv. 147.

26. Battus.

27. The Asbystae were a people in Cyrenaica.

28. Cyre: stream at Cyrene which after running some distance under ground reappears at the
Temple of Apollo as the fountain of Apollo (Herod. iv. 158, Pind. P. iv. 294).

29. Azilis or Aziris where the Theraeans with Battus dwelt for six years before they went to
Cyrene (Herod. iv. 157 ff.).

30. Cyrene.

31. i.e. “Myrtle-hill” in Cyrene.

32. Eurypylus: prehistoric king of Libya, who offered his kingdom to anyone who should slay
the lion which was ravaging his land. Cyrene slew the lion and so won the kingdom (Acesandros of Cyrene in
schol. Apoll. Rh. ii. 498).

33. In Strabo 422 Python is a man, surnamed Draco. Pytho was popularly derived from the fact
that the slain snake rotted (puthô) there.

34. Callimachus seems to adopt the old derivation of aossêtêr from
ossa (voice). Thus aossêtêr = boëthoos. For ezeti cf. H.
iv. 275.

35. Cf. Apoll. Rhod. iii. 932.

36. Euphrates.

37. Deo = Demeter, whose priestesses were called Melissae (Bees): Porphyr. De antro
nympharum 18 kai tas Dêmêtros hiereias hôs tês chthonias theas mustidas
Melissas oi Palaioi ekaloun autên te tên Korên Melitôdê (Theocr. xv. 94).

HYMN III. TO ARTEMIS

[1] Artemis we hymn – no light thing is it for singers to forget her – whose study is the bow and
the shooting of hares and the spacious dance and sport upon the mountains; beginning with the time when sitting
on her father’s knees – still a little maid – she spake these words to her sire: “Give
me to keep my maidenhood, Father, forever: and give me to be of many names, that Phoebus may not vie with me.
And give me arrows and a bow – stay, Father, I ask thee not for quiver or for mighty bow: for me the
Cyclopes will straightway fashion arrows and fashion for me a well-bent bow. But give me to be Bringer of
Light1 and give me to gird me in a tunic2 with
embroidered border reaching to the knee, that I may slay wild beasts. And give me sixty daughters of Oceanus for
my choir – all nine years old, all maidens yet ungirdled; and give me for handmaidens twenty nymphs of
Amnisus3 who shall tend well my buskins, and, when I shoot no more at lynx or stag,
shall tend my swift hounds. And give to me all mountains; and for city, assign me any, even whatsoever thou
wilt: for seldom is it that Artemis goes down to the town. On the mountains will I dwell and the cities of men I
will visit only when women vexed by the sharp pang of childbirth call me to their aid4 even in the hour when I was born the Fates ordained that I should be their helper,
forasmuch as my mother suffered no pain either when she gave me birth or when she carried me win her womb, but
without travail put me from her body.” So spake the child and would have touched her father’s beard,
but many a hand did she reach forth in vain, that she might touch it.

[28] And her father smiled and bowed assent. And as he caressed her, he said: “When goddesses bear me
children like this, little need I heed the wrath of jealous Hera. Take, child, all that thou askest, heartily.
Yea, and other things therewith yet greater will thy father give thee. Three times ten cities and towers more
than one will I vouchsafe thee – three times ten cities that shall not know to glorify any other god but
to glorify the only and be called of Artemis And thou shalt be Watcher over Streets5 and harbours.6” So he spake and bent his head to
confirm his words.

[40] And the maiden faired unto the white mountain of Crete leafy with woods; thence unto Oceanus; and she
chose many nymphs all nine years old, all maidens yet ungirdled. And the river Caraetus7 was glad exceedingly, and glad was Tethys that they were sending their daughters to
be handmaidens to the daughter of Leto.

[46] And straightway she went to visit the Cyclopes. Them she found in the isle of Lipara – Lipara in
later days, but at the at time its name was Meligunis – at the anvils of Hephaestus, standing round a
molten mass of iron. For a great work was being hastened on: they fashioned a horse-trough for Poseidon. And the
nymphs were affrighted when they saw the terrible monsters like unto the crags of Ossa: all had single eyes
beneath their brows, like a shield of fourfold hide for size, glaring terribly from under; and when they heard
the din of the anvil echoing loudly, and the great blast of the bellows and the heavy groaning of the Cyclopes
themselves. For Aetna cried aloud, and Trinacia8 cried, the seat of the Sicanians,
cried too their neighbour Italy, and Cyrnos9 therewithal uttered a mighty noise,
when they lifted their hammers above their shoulders and smote with rhythmic swing10 the bronze glowing from the furnace or iron, labouring greatly. Wherefore the
daughters of Oceanus could not untroubled look upon them face to face nor endure the din in their ears. No shame
to them! On those not even the daughters of the Blessed look without shuddering. Though long past
childhood’s years. But when any of the maidens doth disobedience to her mother, the mother calls the
Cyclopes to her child – Arges or Steropes; and from within the house comes Hermes, stained11 with burnt ashes. And straightway he plays bogey to the child, and she runs into
her mother’s lap, with her hands upon her eyes. But thou, Maiden, even earlier, while yet but three years
old, when Leto came bearing thee in her arms at the bidding of Hephaestus that he might give thee handsel12 and Brontes13 set thee on his stout knees –
thou didst pluck the shaggy hair of his great breast and tear it out by force. And even unto this day the mid
part of his breast remains hairless, even when mange settles on a man’s temples and eats the hair away.

[80] Therefore right boldly didst thou address them then: “Cyclopes, for me too fashion ye a
Cydonian14 bow and arrows and a hollow casket for my shafts; for I also am a child
of Leto, even as Apollo. And if I with my bow shall slay some wild creature or monstrous beast, that shall the
Cyclopes eat.” So didst thou speak and they fulfilled thy words. Straightway dist thou array thee, O
Goddess. And speedily again thou didst go to get thee hounds; and thou camest to the Arcadian fold of Pan. And
he was cutting up the flesh of a lynx of Maenalus15 that his bitches might eat it
for food. And to thee the Bearded God16 gave two dogs black-and-white,17 three reddish,18 and one spotted, which pulled
down19 very lions hen they clutched their throats and haled them still living to
the fold. And he gave thee seven Cynosurian20 bitches swifter than the winds -
that breed which is swiftest to pursue fawns and the hare which closes not his eyes21; swiftest too to mark the lair of the stag and where the porcupine22 hath his burrow, and to lead upon the track of the gazelle.

[98] Thence departing (and thy hounds sped with thee) thou dist find by the base of the Parrhasian hill deer
gamboling – a mighty herd. They always herded by the banks of the black-pebbled Anaurus – larger
than bulls, and from their horns shone gold. And thou wert suddenly amazed and sadist to thine own heart:
“This would be a first capture worthy of Artemis.” Five were there in all; and four thou didst take
by speed of foot – without the chase of dogs – to draw thy swift car. But one escaped over the river
Celadon, by devising of Hera, that it might be in the after days a labour for Heracles,23 and the Ceryneian hill received her.

[109] Artemis, Lady of Maidenhood, Slayer of Tityus, golden were thine arms and golden thy belt, and a golden
car didst thou yoke, and golden bridles, goddess, didst thou put on thy deer. And where first did thy horned
team begin to carry thee? To Thracian Haemus, whence comes the hurricane of Boreas bringing evil breath of frost
to cloakless men. And where didst thou cut the pine and from what flame didst thou kindle it? It was on Mysian
Olympus, and thou didst put in tit the breath of flame unquenchable, which thy Father’s bolts distil. And
how often goddess, didst thou make trial of thy silver bow? First at an elm, and next at an oak didst thou
shoot, and third again at a wild beast. But the fourth time – not long was it ere thou didst shoot at the
city of unjust me, those who to one another and those who towards strangers wrought many deeds of sin, forward
men, on whom thou wilt impress thy grievous wrath. On their cattle plague feeds, on their tilth feeds frost, and
the old men cut their hair in mourning over their sons, and their wives either are smitten or die in childbirth,
or, if they escape, bear birds whereof none stands on upright ankle. But on whomsoever thou lookest smiling and
gracious, for them the tilth bears the corn-ear abundantly, and abundantly prospers the four-footed breed, and
abundant waxes their prosperity: neither do they go to the tomb, save when they carry thither the aged. Nor does
faction wound their race – faction which ravages even the well-established houses: but brother’s
wife and husband’s sister set their chairs around one board.24

[134] Lady, of that number be whosoever is a true friend of mine, and of that number may I be myself, O Queen.
And may song be my study forever. In that song shall be the Marriage of Leto; therein thy name shall often-times
be sung; therein shall Apollo be and therein all thy labours, and therein thy hounds and thy bow and thy
chariots, which lightly carry thee in thy splendour, when thou drivest to the house of Zeus. There in the
entrance meet thee Hermes and Apollo: Hermes the Lord of Blessing,25 takes thy
weapons, Apollo takes whatsoever wild beast thou bringest. Yea, so Apollo did before strong Alcides26 came, but now Phoebus hath this task no longer; in such wise the Anvil of
Tiryns27 stands ever before the gates, waiting to see if thou wilt come home with
some fat morsel. And all the gods laugh at him with laughter unceasingly and most of all his own wife’s
mother28 when he brings from the car a great bull or a wild boar, carrying it by
the hind foot struggling. With this sunning speech, goddess, doth he admonish thee: “Shoot at the evil
wild beasts that mortals may call thee their helper even as they call me. Leave deer and hares to feed upon the
hills. What harm could deer and hares do? It is boars which ravage the tilth of men and boars which ravage the
plants; and oxen are a great bane to men: shoot also at those.” So he spake and swiftly busied him about
the mighty beast. For though beneath a Phrygian29 oak his flesh was deified, yet
hath he not ceased from gluttony. Still hath he that belly wherewith he met Theiodamas30 at the plough.

[162] For thee the nymphs of Amnisus rub down the hinds loosed from the yoke, and from the mead of Hera they
gather and carry for them to feed on much swift-springing clover, which also the horses of Zeus eat; and golden
troughs they fill with water to be for the deer a pleasant draught. And thyself thou enterest thy Father’s
house, and all alike bid thee to a seat; but thou sittest beside Apollo.

[170] But when the nymphs encircle thee in the dance, near the springs of Egyptian Inopus31 or Pitane32 – for Pitane too is thine –
or in Limnae33 or where, goddess, thou camest from Scythia to dwell, in Alae
Araphenides,34 renouncing the rites of the Tauri,35
then may not my kine cleave a four-acred36 fallow field for a wage at the hand of
an alien ploughman; else surely lame and weary of neck would they come to the byre, yea even were they of
Stymphaean37 breed, nine38 years of age, drawing by
the horns; which kine are far the best for cleaving a deep furrow; for the god Helios never passes by that
beauteous dance, but stays his car to gaze upon the sight, and the lights of day are lengthened.

[183] Which now of islands, what hill finds most favour with thee? What haven? What city? Which of the nymphs
dost thou love above the rest, and what heroines hast thou taken for thy companions? Say, goddess, thou to me,
and I will sing thy saying to others. Of islands, Doliche39 hath found favour with
thee, of cities Perge,40 of hills Taygeton,41 the
havens of Euripus. And beyond others thou lovest the nymph of Gortyn, Britomartis,42 slayer of stags, the goodly archer; for love of whom was Minos of old distraught
and roamed the hills of Crete. And the nymph would hide herself now under the shaggy oaks and anon in the low
meadows. And for nine months he roamed over crag and cliff and made not an end of pursuing, until, all but
caught, she leapt into the sea from the top of a cliff and fell into the nets of fishermen which saved her.
Whence in after days the Cydonians call the nymph the Lady of the Nets (Dictyna) and the hill whence the nymph
leaped they call the hill of Nets (Dictaeon), and there they set up altars and do sacrifice. And the garland on
that day is pine or mastich, but the hands touch not the myrtle. For when she was in flight, a myrtle branch
became entangled in the maiden’s robes; wherefore she was greatly angered against the myrtle. Upis,43 O Queen, fair-faced Bringer of Light, thee too the Cretans name after that nymph.

[206] Yea and Cyrene thou madest thy comrade, to whom on a time thyself didst give two hunting dogs, with whom
the maiden daughter of Hypseus44 beside the Iolcian tomb45 won the prize. And the fair-haired wife46 of
Cephalus, son of Deioneus, O Lady, thou madest thy fellow in the chase; and fair Anticleia,47 they say, thou dist love even as thine own eyes. These were the first who wore the
gallant bow and arrow-holding quivers on their shoulders; their right shoulders bore the quiver strap,48 and always the right breast showed bare. Further thou dist greatly commend
swift-footed Atalanta,49 the slayer of boars, daughter of Arcadian Iasius, and
taught her hunting with dogs and good archery. They that were called to hunt the boar of Calydon find no fault
with her; for the tokens of victory came into Arcadia which still holds the tusks of the beast. Nor do I deem
that Hylaeus50 and foolish Rhoecus, for all their hate, in Hades slight her
archery. For the loins, with whose blood the height of Maenalus flowed, will not abet the falsehood.

[225] Lady of many shrines, of many cities, hail! Goddess of the Tunic,51
sojourner in Miletus; for thee did Neleus52 make his Guide,53 when he put off with his ships from the land of Cecrops.54 Lady of Chesion55 and of Imbrasus,56 throned57 in the highest, to thee in thy shrine did
Agamemnon dedicate the rudder of his ship, a charm against ill weather,58 when
thou didst bind the winds for him, what time the Achaean ships sailed to vex the cities of the Teucri, wroth for
Rhamnusian59 Helen.

[233] For thee surely Proetus60 established two shrines, one of Artemis of
Maidenhood for that thou dist gather for him his maiden daughters,61 when they
were wandering over the Azanian62 hills; the other he founded in Lusa63 to Artemis the Gentle,64 because thou tookest from
his daughters the spirit of wildness. For thee, too, the Amazons, whose mind is set on war, in Ephesus beside
the sea established an image beneath an oak trunk, and Hippo65 performed a holy
rite for thee, and they themselves, O Upis Queen, around the image danced a war-dance – first in shields
and armour, and again in a circle arraying a spacious choir. And the loud pipes thereto piped shrill
accompaniment, that they might foot the dance together (for not yet did they pierce the bones of the fawn,
Athena’s handiwork,66 a bane to the deer). And the echo reached unto Sardis
and to the Berecynthian67 range. And they with their feet beat loudly and
therewith their quivers rattled.

[248] And afterwards around that image was raised a shrine of broad foundations. That it shall dawn behold
nothing more divine, naught richer. Easily would it outdo Pytho. Wherefore in this madness insolent Lygdamis
threatened that he would lay it waste, and brought against it a host of Cimmerians68 which milk mares, in number as the sand; who have their homes hard by the
Straits69 of the cow, daughter of Inachus. Ah! foolish among kings, how greatly he
sinned! For not destined to return again to Scythia was either he or any other of those whose wagons stood in
the Caystrian70 plain ; for thy shafts are ever more set as a defence before
Ephesus.

[258] O Lady of Munychia,71 Watcher of Harbours, hail, Lady of Pherae!72 Let none disparage Artemis. For Oeneus73 dishonoured
her altar and no pleasant struggles came upon his city. Nor let any content with her in shooting of stags or in
archery. For the son74 of Atreus vaunted him not that he suffered small requital.
Neither let any woo the Maiden; for not Otus, nor Orion wooed her to their own good. Nor let any shun the yearly
dance; for not tearless to Hippo75 was her refusal to dance around the altar.
Hail, great queen, and graciously greet my song.

1. phôsphoros is one of the titles of Artemis; cf.
v. 204, Eur. Iphi. in T. 21.

2. See note on v. 225.

3.
Amnisus, river in Crete. Cf. Apoll. Rhod. iii. 877 ff.

4. Artemis in one aspect is Eileithyia = Lucina. She is said to have been born before Apollo
and to have assisted at his birth. Hence her birthday was put on the 6th of Thargelion (Diog. L. ii. 44), while
Apollo was born on the 7th. (W. Schmidt, Geburstag im Altertum, p. 94.)

5. Hence her title enodia, A. P. vi. 199.

6. As goddess of mariners she is called Euporia, Limenitis etc. So Nêossoos,
Apoll. Rh. i. 570.

7. River near Cnossus in Crete, Strabo 476.

8. Sicily.

9. Corsica.

10. It is hard to determine the sense of amboladis. The schol. says ek
diadochês, i.e. in succession or alternately. The same difficulty attaches to
amblêdên and amboladên, which the scholiasts interpret usually as either =
apopooimiou or as = “by spurts” (e.g. Pind. N. x. 62, where among other
explanations in the scholia one is ouk ephexês, i.e. not continuously). The combination
of amboladên with zeiô in Hom. Il. xxi. 364, Herod. iv. 181 might suggest
that here to amboladis should be taken with zeionta in the sense of “sputtering,”
but the order of words is against that.

11. kechrêmenos of MSS. is probably correct. This
participle in late poetry is used in the vaguest way to indicate any sort of condition.

12. optêria, ta hyper tou idein dôra (schol.), were gifts given on seeing
for the first time a new-born child (schol. Aesch. Eum. 7; Nonn. v. 139). Very similar is the
birthday-gift proper, the dosis genethlios or gegethlia. Ta epi tê prôtê
hêmera dôra (Hesych.). Phoebe gave the oracle at Delphi as a birthday gift to Phoebus. More
usually optêria = anakaluptêria, gifts given to the bride by the bridegroom on
seeing her for the first time; Pollux ii. 59 optêria ta dôra ta para tou proton idontos
tên numphên numphiou didomena. Cf. iii. 36 ta de para tou andros didomena edna kai
optêria kai anakaluptêria . . . kai prosphthegktêria ekaloun. Moeris 205. 24
optêria Attikôs, anakaluptêria Hellênikôs.

13. The three Cyclopes, sons of Gaia, were Brontes, Steropes, Arges (Hesiod, Th.
140).

14. i.e. Cretan, cf. Stat. Th. iv. 269 “Cydonea harundine,” vii.
339 “Cydoneas sagittas.”

15. Mountain in Arcadia.

16. Cf. Homer H. Pan 39.

17.The ancients differed as to whether pêgos meant black or white (Hesych.
s.vv. pêgos and pêgesimallô).

18. It is by no means certain that the MSS. parouatious is wrong, “with hanging
ears.” Parouaious is based upon Hesych. s.v v. parôas, parôos, Aelian.
H.A. viii. 12 cf. Arist. H.A. ix. 45, Dem. De cor. 260. Should we read
Parauaious, i.e. Molossian?

19. au eruontes, common in Oppian and Nonnus, is apparently a misunderstanding of the
Homeric aueruontes (= anaferuontes).

20. Arcadian, cf. Stat. Th. iv. 295 “dives Cynosura ferarum.”

21. Oppian, Cyneg. iii. 511 f.

22. Oppian, ibid. 391 ff.

23. Apollodor. ii. 5. 3 “The third labour which he (Eurystheus) imposed on him
(Heracles) was to bring the Cerynean hind (Kerunitin elaphon) to Mycenae alive. This was a hind . . .
with golden horns, sacred to Artemis.” Cf. Pind. O. iii. 29.

24. einateres = wives whose husbands are brothers; galiô = wife and
sister(s) of one man. (Hom. Il. vi. 378) Gercke, Rh. Mus. xlii (1887), p. 273 ff., sees an
allusion to Arsinoë I. and Arsinoë II.

25. Cf. the Homeric epithet of Hermes, Akakêta, Il. xvi. 185, etc.

26. Heracles, as son of Amphitryon son of Alcaeus. According to Apollodor. ii. 4. 12, Alcides
was the original name of Heracles, the latter name having been bestowed upon him by the Pythian priestess when
he consulted the oracle after he had gone into exile for the murder of his children. Heracles asked the oracle
where he should dwell and he was told to settle in Tiryns and serve Eurystheus for twelve years.

27. There is nor reason whatever to suppose that akmôn here has any other than
its ordinary sense of anvil, used metaphorically, as in Aesch. Pers. 52. It has been sometimes supposed
to mean unwearied = akamatos.

28. Hera, mother of Hebe.

29. “Phrygia, a hill in Trachis where Heracles burnt” (schol.)

30. When Heracles was passing through the land of the Dryopes, being in want of food for his
young son Hyllus, he unyoked and slaughtered one of the oxen of Theiodamas, king of the Dryopes, whom he found
at the plough. War ensued between the Dryopes and Heracles, and the Dryopes were defeated, and Hylas, son of
Theiodamas, was taken as a hostage by Heracles (Apollodor. ii. 7. 7, Apoll. Rh. i. 1211 ff., Ovid, Ib.
488). Hence Heracles got the epithet Bouthoinas, schol. Apoll. Rh. l.c., Gregor. Naz. Or. iv. 123. The
Lindian peasant who was similarly treated by Heracles, and who, while Heracles feasted, stood apart and cursed
(hence curious rite at Lindos in Rhodes, where, when they sacrifice to Heracles, they do it with curses, Conon
11, Apollod. ii. 5. 11. 9, Lactant. Inst. Div. i. 21) is identified with Theiodamas by Philostr.
Imag. ii. 24. Cf. G. Knaack, Hermes xxiii. (1888), p. 131 ff.

31. Inopus in Delos was supposed to have a subterranean connexion with the
Nile.

32. On the Eurotas with temple of Artemis.

33. This may be the Athenian Limnae (so schol.); but there was a Limnaeon also in Laconia with
temple of Artemis and an image supposed to be that carried off by Orestes and Iphigeneia (Paus. iii. 7) from
Taurica.

34. Attic deme between Marathon and Brauron with temple of Artemis (Eurip. Iphig. in
T. 1446 ff.).

35. In the Crimea, where Artemis was worshipped with human sacrifice (Eurip. l.c.,
Ovid, Trist. Iv. 4, Ex Ponto iii. 2, Herod. iv. 103).

36. The typical heroic field (Hom. Od. xviii. 374, Apoll. Rh. iii. 1344); cf.
Od. vii. 113.

37. i.e. from Epirus. For the great size of the Êpeirôtikai boes
see Aristotle, H.A. iii. 21, who says that when milking them the milker had to stand upright in order
to reach the udder. Both Stymphaea and Tymphaea seem to be attested, though the latter seems to have the better
authority (Steph. Byz. s.v. Tumphon).

38. Hesiod, W. 436.

39. Doliche: either Euboea (E.M. s.v. Euboia), E. Maass, Hermes xxv. (1890),
p. 404, or Icaros (Steph. Byz. s.v. Ikaros), or an island of Lycia (Steph. Byz. s.v. Dolichê.
nêsos pros tê Lukia, hôs Kallimachos).

40. In Pamphylia, with temple of Artemis, Strabo 667.

41. In Laconia.

42. Britomartis or Dictyna, a Cretan goddess sometimes represented as an attendant of Artemis,
sometimes regarded as identical with her.

43. Artemis in Ephesus, Sparta, etc.

44. Cyrene.

45. "The tomb of Pelias" (schol.).

46. Procris.

47. Mother of Odysseus.

48. The MS. asul(l)ôtoi is quite unknown. The translation assumes a connexion
with asilla.

49. Atalanta took a prominent part in the hunt of the Calydonian boar, and received from
Meleager the hide and head of the boar as her prize (Paus. viii. 45).

50. Hylaeus and Rhoecus were two centaurs who insulted Atalanta and were shot by her (Apollod.
iii. 9. 2).

51. Chitone, by-name of Artemis as huntress, wearing a sleeveless tunic
(chitôn) reaching to the knees.

52. Neleus, son of Codrus, founder of Miletus (Strabo, 633).

53. Artemis Hegemone as leader of colonists (Paus. viii. 37).

54. i.e. Athens.

55. Cape in Samos.

56. River in Samos.

57. Artemis was worshipped in Ephesus with the tile Prôtothroniê (Paus.
x. 38. 6). For rock-cut throne on Mount Coressus at Ephesus cf. A. B. Cook, Zeus, i. p. 140
f.

58. The aploia is sometimes described as a storm, sometimes as a dead calm.

59. Epithet of Helen as daughter of Nemesis, who was worshipped at Rhamnus in Attica.

60. King of Argos.

61. For their madness and cure cf. Paus. ii. 7. 8, viii. 18. 7 f.

62. Azania in Arcadia.

63. In Arcadia.

64. For the temple of Artemis Hemera or Hemerasia at Lusa cf. Paus. viii. 18. 8.

65. Queen of the Amazons, no doubt identical with Hippolyte.

66. The flute (aulos) invented by Athena (Pind. P. xii. 22) was often made
from fawn bones, Poll. Iv. 71, Athen. 182 E, Plut. Mor. 150 E.

67. In Phrygia.

68. A people living on the north of the Black Sea.

69. The Cimmerian Bosporus, which was named after the Cow (bous), i.e. Io,
daughter of Inachus, king of Argos.

70. The Cayster is a river in Lydia.

71. Harbour of Athens, where Artemis had a temple (Paus. i. 1. 4).

72. Artemis Pheraia is Artemis as Hecate from Pherae in Thessaly (Paus. ii. 23. 5).

73. King of Calydon in Aetolia, who neglected to sacrifice to Artemis. In anger she sent the
Calydonian boar to ravage his land.

74. Agamemnon, who shot a stag which was sacred to Artemis and boasted of the deed (Soph.
Electr. 566 f., Hygin. Fab. 98). This led to the aploia at Aulis and the sacrifice of
Iphigeneia.

75. Queen of the Amazons, who founded the temple of Artemis at Ephesus.

SEARCH THEOI

CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

Aeschylus, Agamemnon

Aeschylus, Eumenides

Aeschylus, Libation Bearers

Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound

Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes

Aeschylus, Suppliant Women

Aeschylus, Fragments

Alcman, Fragments

Apollodorus, The Library

Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica

Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena

Bion, Poems

Callimachus, Hymns

Callistratus, Descriptions

Claudian, Gigantomachia

Claudian, Rape of Proserpine

Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks

Clement, Recognitions

Colluthus, Rape of Helen

Dares Phrygius

Dictys Cretensis

Diodorus Siculus, Library of History

Epic Cycle Fragments

Fulgentius, Mythologies

Greek Lyric Fragments

Hesiod, Shield of Heracles

Hesiod, Theogony

Hesiod, Works and Days

Hesiod, Fragments

Homer, Iliad

Homer, Odyssey

Homeric Hymns

Hyginus, Astronomica

Hyginus, Fabulae

Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead

Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods

Lycophron, Alexandra

Moschus, Poems

Nonnus, Dionysiaca

Orphic Hymns

Ovid, Fasti

Ovid, Heroides

Ovid, Metamorphoses

Parthenius, Love Romances

Pattern Poems

Pausanias, Description of Greece

Philostratus the Elder, Imagines

Philostratus the Younger, Imagines

Plutarch, Life of Theseus

Plutarch, Parallel Stories

Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy

Seneca, Agamemnon

Seneca, Hercules Furens

Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus

Seneca, Medea

Seneca, Oedipus

Seneca, Phaedra

Seneca, Phoenissae

Seneca, Thyestes

Seneca, Troades

Statius, Achilleid

Statius, Thebaid

Theocritus, Idylls

Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios

Tzetzes, Chiliades

Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica

Virgil, Aeneid

Virgil, Eclogues

Virgil, Georgics

RECENT ARTICLES

Who Was Achilles A Warrior?

What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules?

Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z

-->

.

Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

Contact Us


============================================================


CALLIMACHUS, HYMNS 4-6 - Theoi Classical Texts Library

.

Toggle navigation
Theoi Project - Classical Texts
Library

LIBRARY HOME
GREEK MYTHOLOGY
GREEK GODS

Olympian Gods
Primordial Gods
Titan Gods
Sky Gods
Sea Gods
Rustic Gods
Underworld Gods
Daemones-Spirits
Nymphs
more >>

BESTIARY
HEROES
MISCELLANY

Gods, Spirits & Monsters A-Z
Family Tree of the Gods
Legendary Tribes
Legendary Creatures
Star Myths
Plant & Flower Myths

GALLERY

Classical Texts
Library >> Callimachus, Hymns >> Hymns 4-6
CALLIMACHUS, HYMNS 4 - 6

HYMNS CONTENTS

HYMNS 1 - 3

1. To Zeus

2. To Apollo

3. To Artemis

HYMNS 4 - 6

4. To Delos

5. The Bath of Pallas

6. To Demeter

HYMNS 4 - 6, TRANSLATED BY A. W. MAIR
HYMN IV. TO DELOS

[1] What time or when, O my soul, wilt thou sing of holy Delos, nurse of Apollo? Surely all the Cyclades most
holy of the isles that lie in the sea, are goodly theme of song. But Delos would win the foremost guerdon from
the Muses, since she it was that bathed Apollo, the lord of minstrels, and swaddled him, and was the first to
accept him for a god. Even as the Muses abhor him who sings not of Pimpleia1 so
Phoebus abhors him who forgets Delos. To Delos no will I give her share of song, so that Cynthian2 Apollo may praise me for taking thought of his dear nurse.

[11] Wind-swept and stern is she set in the sea, and, wave-beaten as she is, is fitter haunt for gulls than
course for horses. The sea, rolling greatly round her, casts off on her much spindrift of the Icarian3 water. Wherefore also sea-roaming fishermen have made her their home. But none need
grudge that she be named among the first, whensoever unto Oceanus and unto Titan Tethys the islands gather and
she ever leads the way. Behind her footsteps follow Phoenician Cyrnus,4 no mean
isle, and Abantian Macris5 of the Ellopians, and delectable Sardo,6 and the isle7 whereto Cypris first swam from the water
and for fee8 of her landing she keeps safe. They are strong by reason of sheltering
towers, but Delos is strong by aid of Apollo. What defence is there more steadfast? Walls and stones may fall
before the blast of Strymonian9 Boreas; but a god is unshaken for ever. Delos
beloved, such is the champion that encompasses thee about!

[28] Now if songs full many circle about thee, with what song shall I entwine thee? What is that which is
pleasing unto thee to hear? Is it the tale how at the very first the mighty god10
smote the mountains with the three-forked sword which the Telchines11 fashioned
for him, and wrought the islands in the sea, and from their lowest foundations lifted them all as with a lever
and rolled them into the sea? And them in the depths he rooted from their foundations that they might forget the
mainland. But no constraint afflicted thee, but free upon the open sea thou didst float; and thy name of old was
Asteria,12 since like a star thou didst leap from heaven into the deep moat,
fleeing wedlock with Zeus. Until then golden Leto consorted not with thee: then thou wert still Asteria and wert
not yet called Delos. Oft-times did sailors coming from the town of fair-haired Troezen13 unto Ephyra14 within the Saronic gulf descry thee,
and on their way back from Ephyra saw thee no more there, but thou hadst run to the swift straits of the narrow
Euripus with its sounding stream. And the same day, turning thy back on the waters of the sea of Chalcis, thou
didst swim to the Sunian headland of the Athenians or to Chios or to the wave-washed breast o the Maiden’s
Isle,15 not yet called Samos – where the nymphs of Mycalessos,16 neighbours of Ancaeus, entertained thee.

[51] But when thou gavest thy soil to be birthplace of Apollo, seafaring men gave thee this name in exchange,
since no more didst thou float17 obscure (adêlos) upon the water,
but amid the waves of the Aegean sea dist plant the roots of they feet.

[55] And thou didst not tremble before the anger of Hera, who murmured terribly against all child-bearing women
that bare children to Zeus, but especially against Leto, for that she only was to bear to Zeus a son18 dearer even than Ares. Wherefore also she herself kept watch within the sky,
angered in her heart greatly and beyond telling, and she prevented Leto who was holden in the pangs of
childbirth. And she had two look-outs set to keep watch upon the earth. The space of the continent did bold Ares
watch, sitting armed on the high top of Thracian Haemus, and his horses were stalled by the seven-chambered
cave19 of Boreas. And the other kept watch over the far-flung islands, even the
daughter20 of Thaumas seated on Mimas,21 whither she
had sped. There they sat and threatened all the cities which Leto approached and prevented them from receiving
her. Fled Arcadia, fled Auge’s22 holy hill Parthenium, fled after her aged
Pheneius,23 fled all the land of Pelops that lies beside the Isthmus, save only
Aegialos24 and Argos. For on those ways she set not her feet, since Inachus25 belonged unto Hera. Fled, too, Aonia26 on the same
course, and Dirce27 and Strophia,28 holding the
hands of their sire, dark-pebbled Ismenus29; far behind followed Asopus,30 heavy-kneed, for he was marred by a thunderbolt. And the earth-born nymph
Melia31 wheeled about thereat and ceased from the dance and her cheek paled as she
panted for her coeval oak, when she saw the locks of Helicon tremble. Goddesses mine, ye Muses, say did the oaks
come into being at the same time as the Nymphs? The nymphs rejoice when the rain makes the oaks grow; and again
the Nymphs weep when there are no longer leaves upon the oaks. And Apollo, yet in his mother’s womb, was
sore angered against them and he uttered against Thebe no ineffectual threat: “Thebe, wherefore, wretched
one, dost thou ask the doom that shall be thine anon? Force me not yet to prophesy against my will. Not yet is
the tripod seat at Pytho my care; not yet is the great serpent32 dead, but still
that beast of awful jaws, creeping down from Pleistus,33 wreathes snowy Parnassus
with his nine coils. Nevertheless I will speak unto thee a word more clear than shall be spoken from
laurel34 branch.. Flee on! Swiftly shall I overtake thee and wash my bow in blood.
Thou hast in thy keeping the children of a slanderous woman.35 Not thou shalt be
my dear nurse, nor Cithaeron.36 Pure am I and may I be the care of them that are
pure.” So he spake. And Leto turned and went back. But when the Achaean cities refused her as she came
– Helice,37 the companion of Poseidon, and Bura,38 the steading of Dexamenus, the son of Oeceus – she turned her feet back to
Thessaly. And Anaurus fled and great Larisa and the cliffs of Cheiron39; fled,
too, Peneius, coiling through Tempe.

[106] But thy heart, Hera, was even then still pitiless and thou wert not broken down nor didst have
compassion, when she stretched forth both her arms and spake in vain: “Ye nymphs of Thessaly, offspring of
a river,40 tell your sire to hush his great stream. Entwine your hands about his
beard and entreat him that the children of Zeus be born in his waters. Phthiotian Peneius, why dost thou now vie
with the winds? O sire, thou dost not bestride a racing horse. Are they feet always thus swift, or are they
swift only for me, and hast thou today been suddenly made to fly?” But he heard her not. “O burden
mine, whither shall I carry thee? The hapless sinews of my feet are outworn. O Pelion, bridal chamber of
Philyra,41 do thou stay, O stay, since on thy hills even the wild lionesses
oftentimes lay down their travail of untimely birth.”42 Then shedding tears,
Peneius answered her: “Leto, Necessity is a great goddess. It is not I who refuse, O Lady, they travail;
for I know of others who have washed the soilure of birth in me – but Hera hath largely threatened me.
Behold what manner of watcher keeps vigil on the mountain top, who would lightly drag me forth from the depths.
What shall I devise? Or is it a pleasant thing to thee that Peneius should perish? Let my destined day take its
course. I will endure for thy sake, even if I must wander evermore with ebbing flood and thirsty, and alone be
called of least honour among rivers. Here am I! What needeth more? Do thou but call upon Eileithyia.” He
spake and stayed his great stream. But Ares was about to lift the peaks of Pangaeum43 from their base and hurl them in his eddying waters and hide his streams. And from
on high he made a din as of thunder and smote his shield with the point of his spear, and it rang with a warlike
noise. And the hills of Ossa trembled and the plain of Crannon, and the windswept skirts of Pindus, and all
Thessaly danced for fear: such echoing din rang from his shield. And even as when the mount Aetna smoulders with
fire and all its secret depths are shaken as the giant under earth, even Briares, shifts to his other
shoulder,44 and with the tongs of Hephaestus roar furnaces and handiwork withal;
and firewrought basins and tripods ring terribly as the fall one upon the other: such in that hour was the
rattle of the fair-rounded shield. But Peneius retired not back, but abode his ground, steadfast even as before,
and stayed his swift-eddying streams, until the daughter45 of Coeüs called to
him: “Save thyself, farewell! Save thyself; do not for my sake suffer evil for this thy compassion; thy
favour shall be rewarded.”

[153] So she spake and after much toil came unto the isles of the sea. But they received her not when she came
– not the Echinades46 with their smooth anchorage for ships, not Cercyra
which is of all other islands most hospitable, since Iris on lofty Mimas47 was
wroth with them all and utterly prevented them. And at her rebuke they fled all together, every one that she
came to, along the waters. Then she came unto primeval Cos, the isle of Merops,48
the holy retreat of the heroine Chalciope,49 but the word of her son restrained
her: “Bear me not, mother, here. I blame not the island nor have any grudge, since a bright isle it is and
rich in pasture as any other. But there is due to her from the Fates another god,50 the most high lineage of the Saviours51; beneath
whose crown shall come – not loth to be ruled by a Macedonian – both continents and the lands which
are set in the sea, far as where the end of the earth is and again whence his swift horses carry the sun. And he
shall know the ways of his sire.

[171] “Yea and one day hereafter thee shall come upon us a common struggle, when the Titans of a later
day shall rouse up against he Hellenes barbarian sword and Celtic war,52 and from
the furthest West rush on like snowflakes and in number as the stars when they flock most thickly in the sky;
forts too (and the villages of the Locrians and Delphian heights)53 and Crisaean
plains and (glens of the mainland) be thronged about and around, and shall behold the rich smoke of their
burning neighbour, and no longer by hearsay only; but already beside the temple behold the ranks of the foemen,
and already beside my tripods the swords and cruel belts and hateful shields, which shall cause an evil journey
to the foolish tribe of the Galatians. Of these shields some shall be my guerdon; others, when they have seen
the wearers perish amid fire, shall be set by the banks of Nile54 to be the prizes
of a king who laboured much. O Ptolemy who art to be, these prophecies I declare for thee. Greatly shalt thou
praise in all the days to be him that prophesied while yet in his mother’s womb.

[191] “But mark thou, mother: there is to be seen in the water a tiny island, wandering over the seas.
Her feet abide not in one place, but on the tide she swims even as stalks of asphodel, where the South wind or
the East wind blows, withersoever the sea carried her. Thither do thou carry me. For she shall welcome thy
coming.”

[196] When he had spoken thus much, the other islands in the sea ran away. But thou, Asteria, lover of song,
didst come down from Euboea to visit the round Cyclades – not long ago, but still behind thee trailed the
sea-weed of Geraestus . . . ((lacuna)) since they heart55 was kindled, seeing the
unhappy lady in the grievous pangs of birth: “Hera, do to me what thou wilt. For I heed not they threats.
Cross, cross over, Leto, unto me.”

[205] So didst thou speak, and she gladly ceased from her grievous wandering and sat by the stream of
Inopus,56 which the earth sends forth in deepest flood at the season when the Nile
comes down in full torrent from the Aethiopian steep. And she loosed her girdle and leaned back her shoulders
against the trunk of a palm-tree,57 oppressed by the grievous distress, and the
sweat poured over her flesh like rain. And she spake in her weakness: “Why, child, dost thou weigh down
thy mother? There, dear child, is thine island floating on the sea. Be born, be born, my child, and gently issue
from the womb.” O Spouse of Zeus, Lady of heavy anger, thou wert not to be for long without tidings
thereof: so swift a messenger hastened to thee. And, still breathing heavily, she spake – and her speech
was mingled with fear: “Honoured Hera, of goddesses most excellent far, thine am I, all things are thine,
and thou sittest authentic queen of Olympus, and we fear no other female hand; and thou, O Queen wilt know who
is the cause of thine anger. Leto is undoing her girdle within an island. All the others spurned her and
received her not; but Asteria called her by name as she was passing by – Asteria that evil scum of the
sea: thou knowest it thyself. But dear lady, - for thou canst – defend thy servants who tread the earth at
thy behest.”

[228] So she spake and seated her beside the golden throne, even as a hunting hound of Artemis, which, when it
hath ceased from the swift chase, sitteth by her feet, and its ears are erect, ever ready to receive the call of
the goddess. Like thereto the daughter of Thaumas sat beside her throne. And she never forgetteth her seat, not
even when sleep lays upon her his forgetful wing, but here by the edge of the great throne with head a little
bent aslant she sleeps. Never does she unloose her girdle or her swift hunting-boots lest her mistress give her
some sudden command. And Hera was grievously angered and spake to her: “So now, O shameful creatures of
Zeus, may ye all wed in secret and bring forth in darkness, not even where the poor mill-women bring forth in
difficult labour, but where the seals of the sea bring forth, amid the desolate rocks. But against Asteria am I
no wise angered for this sin, nor can I do to her so unkindly as I should – for very wrongly has she done
a favour to Leto. Howbeit I honour her exceedingly for that she did not desecrate my bed, but instead of Zeus
preferred the sea.”

[249] She spake: and with music the swans,58 the gods’ own minstrels, left
Maeonian Pactolus and circled seven times round Delos, and sang over the bed of child-birth, the Muses’
birds, most musical of all birds that fly. Hence that child in after days strung the lyre with just so many
strings – seven strings, since seven times the swans sang over the pangs of birth. No eight time sang
they: ere that the child leapt forth and the nymphs of Delos, offspring of an ancient river, sang with
far-sounding voice the holy chant of Eileithyia. And straightway the brazen sky echoed back the far-reaching
chant and Hera grudged it not, because Zeus had taken away her anger. In that hour, O Delos, all thy foundations
became of gold: with gold thy round lake59 flowed all day, and golden foliage thy
natal olive-tree put forth and with gold flowed coiled Inopus in deep flood.

[264] And thou thyself didst take up the child from the golden earth and lay him in thy lap and thou spakest
saying: “O mighty and of many altars and many cities, bounteous earth! Rich continents and ye islands set
around lo! I am as thou see’st – hard of tillage; yet from me shall Apollo be called ‘Of
Delos’, and none other among all lands shall be so beloved by any other god: not Cerchnis60 so loved by Poseidon, lord of Lechaeum, not Cyllene’s hill61 by Hermes, not Crete by Zeus, as I by Apollo; and I shall no more be a wandering
isle.” Thus didst thou speak and the child drew the sweet breast.

[275] Wherefore from that day thou art famed as the most holy of islands, nurse of Apollo’s youth. On
thee treads not Enyo nor Hades nor the horses of Ares; but every year tithes of first-fruits are sent to thee:
to thee all cities lead up choirs, both those cities which have cast their lots toward the East and those toward
the West and those in the South, and the peoples which have their homes above the northern shore, a very
long-lived race.62 These63 first bring thee
cornstalks and holy sheaves of corn-ears, which the Pelasgians of Dodona, who couch upon the ground , servants
of the caldron64 which is never silent – far first receive, as these
offerings enter their country from afar. Next they come to the Holy town and mountains of the Malian land; and
thence they sail across to the goodly Lelantian plain65 of the Abantes; and then
not long is the voyage from Euboea, since thy havens are nigh thereto. The first to bring thee these offerings
fro the fair-haired Arimaspi66 were Upis and Loxo and happy Hecaerge, daughters of
Boreas, and those who then were the best of the young men. And they returned no home again, but a happy fate was
theirs, and they shall never be without their glory. Verily the girls of Delos, when the sweet-sounded marriage
hymn affrights the maidens’ quarters, bring offerings of their maiden hair to the maidens, while the boys
offer to the young men the first harvest of the down upon their cheeks.

[300] Asteria, island of incense, around and about thee the isles have made a circle and set themselves about
thee as a choir. Not silent art thou nor noiseless when Hesperus of the curling locks looks down on thee, but
ringing evermore with sound. The men sing the song of the old man of Lycia – the very song which the seer
Olen67 brought thee from Xanthos: the maidens of the choir beat with their feet
the steadfast ground. Then, too, is the holy image laden with garlands, the famous image of ancient Cypris whom
of old Theseus with the youths established when he was sailing back from Crete. Having escaped the cruel
bellowing and the wild son68 of Pasiphaë69 and
the coiled habitation of the crooked labyrinth, about thine altar, O lady, they raised the music of the lute and
danced the round dance, and Theseus led the choir. Hence the ever-living offerings of the Pilgrim Ship70 do the sons71 of Cecrops send to Phoebus, the gear of
that vessel.

[316] Asteria of many altars and many prayers, what merchant mariner of the Aegean passes by thee with speeding
ship? Never do such mighty winds as that blow upon him, but though need urges the swiftest voyage that may be,
yet they speedily furl their sails and go not on board again, ere they have circled they great altar buffeted
with blows and bitten the sacred trunk of the olive, their hands tied behind their backs.72 These things did the nymph of Delos devise for sport and laughter to young Apollo.

[325] O happy hearth of islands, hail to thyself! Hail also to Apollo and to her73 whom Leto bare!

1. Fountain in Pieria near Mt. Olympus, sacred to the Muses.

2. Cynthos, mountain in Delos.

3. The Icarian sea, so called from Icarus, son of Daedalus, who fell into it when his father
and he attempted to fly from Crete with artificial wings to escape the wrath of Minos. (Strabo 639, Diodor. iv.
77.)

4. Corsica, colonized by the Phoenicians.

5. Euboea, which was also called Ellopia from Ellops, son of Ion (Strabo 445, Steph. B.
s.v. Ellopia.)

6. Sardinia.

7. Cyprus (schol.).

8. epibathron (Hom. Od. xiv. 449, Callim. Hec. 31, Apoll. Rh. i.
421) is properly the fee for entering a ship; cf. Eustath. on Hom. l.c., Hesych. s.v. =
naulon. Here = fee for setting foot in Cyprus. Cf. Nonnus xiii. 457 Paphon . . . ex
hudatôn epibathron anerchomenês Aphroditês.

9. Strymon, river in Thrace. (aph’ ou ho boras. Strumoniou boreao, Steph. B.
s.v.)

10. Poseidon.

11. Mythical artificers, “notique operum Telchines,” Statius.
T. ii. 274; S. iv. 6. 47.

12. As if from aster = star. Stat. A. i. 388 “instabili Delo."

13. Troezen, son of Pelops, founder of Troezen in Argolis (Strabo 374, Paus. ii. 30. 8, Steph.
B. s.v.)

14. Ephyra, old name of Corinth (Paus. ii. 1. 1, Strabo 338, Steph. Byz. s.v.)

15. Parthenia, old name for Samos (Steph. Byz. s.v.).

16. Mycale lies on the mainland, opposite Samos, of which Ancaeus, son of Zeus or Poseidon and
Astypalaia, was the mythical king. Steph. Byz., s.v. Mukalêssos, says esti kai oros
Mukalêssos enantion Samou. kai Mukalêssis to Thêlukon.

17. Stat. T. viii. 197 “partuque ligatam Delon."

18. Apollo.

19. Cf. Stat. Th. vi. 100 “Dat gemitum tellus: non sic eversa feruntur
Ismara, cum fracto Boreas caput extulit N.H. vii. 10; Soph. Ant. 983, schol.; Apoll. Rh. i.
826; Sil. It. Prin. Viii. 513; Serv. Verg. A. x. 350, xii. 366; [Plutarch], De fluv. 14.
5).

20. Iris (Stat. Th. x. 123).

21. Mimas, mountain in Ionia opposite to Chios.

22. Auge, daughter of Aleos, king of Tegea. Hera father, warned by an oracle that his sons
would perish by a descendant of his daughter, made her a priestess to Athena. She became, however, the mother of
Telephus by Heracles and gave birth to her son on the hill Parthenium in Arcadia (Diodor. iv. 33. 7 ff.).
Cf. Paus. viii. 48. 7, who says at Tegea Eileithyia was worshipped as Augê en gonasi
because Auge bare her son there. But he mentions another story which said Telephus was exposed on
Parthenium.

23. The authochtonous founder of Pheneos, town in Arcadia (Paus. viii. 14. 4).

24. Aegialos sometimes denoted the whole district from Sicyon to Buprasium (Steph. Byz.
s.v.), i.e. Achaia (Paus. v. 1. 1, vii. 1. 1, Strabo 333), here more strictly the district of
Sicyon (which was also called Aegiale, Paus. ii. 6. 5).

25. Inachus, river in Argolis.

26. Aonia = Boeotia.

27. Dirce, river at Thebes.

28. Strophia, unknown river of Boeotia.

29. Ismenos, river of Boeotia.

30. River in Boeotia.

31. The Meliae or Ash-nymphs were of the same class as the Dryads or
Hamadryads. The Melia referred to here was the sister of Ismenus. For the general idea cf. Stat.
Silv. i. 3. 59 ff.

32. The dragon which occupied or watched Delphi and which Apollo slew; cf. Hymn
Apoll. 100 ff., Hom. Hymn Apoll. 282 ff.

33. River at Delphi.

34. The laurel of the Pythian priestess at Delphi.

35. Niobe, daughter of Tantalus and wife of Amphion of Thebes, had twelve children – six
sons and six daughters – who were slain by Apollo and Artemis because Niobe boasted of the number of her
children compared with Leto, who had but two.

36. Cithaeron, mountain in Boeotia.

37. Helice, town in Achaia with temple of Poseidon Heliconios (Paus. vii. 24. 5, Strabo 384,
cf. Hom. Il. xx. 404). Helice was daughter of Selinus and by Ion mother of Bura (Paus. vii. 1.
2, vii. 25. 5).

38. Bura, town in Achaia, where Dexamenus a Centaur had great cattle-stalls (schol.). In
E.M. s.v. Bousa he is called Exadios.

39. Pelion in Thessaly, home of the Centaur Cheiron.

40. Among the daughters of Peneios are Iphis, Atrax, Tricca, Menippe, Daphne, and, according
to some, Cyrene.

41. Cheiron was the son of the union of Cronus and Philyra on Mt. Pelion
(Pind. P. iii. 1 f., ix. 30, etc.).

42. The reference is to the helplessness and shapelessness of the lion cub at birth.
Cf. Aristotle, De gen. animal. iv. 6 ta men adirthrôta schedon genna, kathaper
alôpêx arktos leôn. The sense of ômos is precisely that of crudus in Stat.
Th. iv. 280 “quercus laurique ferbant Cruda puerperia.”

43. Mountain in Thrace.

44. Cf. Frazer, G.B., Adonis, Attis, Osiris, i. p. 197 : "The
People of Timor, in the East Indies, think that he earth rests on the shoulder of a mighty giant, and that when
he is weary of bearing it on one shoulder he shifts it to the other and so causes the ground to quake.”
Ibid. p. 200: “The Tongans think that the earth is supported on the prostrate form of the god
Móooi. When he is tired of lying in one posture, he tries to turn himself about, and that causes an
earthquake.”

45. Leto, daughter of Coeüs and Phoebe.

46. At the mouth of the Achelous.

47. “Windy Mimas,” Od. iii. 172. Mountain in Erythraea opposite
Chios.

48. King of Cos (Steph. Byz. s.v v. Kôs and Merops).

49. Daughter of Eurypylos, king of Cos, mother of Thessalos by Heracles (Apollod. ii. 7.
8).

50. Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, son of Ptolemy I. Soter and Berenice, was born in Cos in 310/9
B.C. The date of the birth of Philadelphus is now settled by the discovery of a new fragment of the Marmor
Parium (Athen. Mitth. xxii. [1897]) which has: archontos Athênêsi
Hieromnêmonos (310/9 B.C.) Ptolemaiou ho huios en Kôi egeneto. Cf. Theocrit. xvii.
58 ff.

51. Soter, or Saviour, a title of the Ptolemies.

52. From 300 B.C. there was a great southward movement of the Celts from the Balkan
peninsular. In 280/279 they invaded Greece, where they attacked Delphi, but were miraculously routed by Apollo.
It was shortly after this that a body of them settled in the district of Asia afterwards known as Galatia
(circ. 240 B.C.).

53. The readings here are an attempt in the inferior MSS. to supply the lanunae. They have no
intrinsic value.

54. In the course of the revolt of Magas of Cyrene Ptolemy Philadelphus had enrolled a body of
Gallic mercenaries. They became rebellious and attempted to make themselves master of Egypt. Ptolemy enticed
them into a desert island formed by the branches of the Nile, where he left them to die by famine and mutual
slaughter (Paus. i. 7. 2). See Bouché - Leclercq, Histoire des Lagides, i. p. 167; Mahaffy,
The Empire of the Ptolemies, p. 124 ff. The date of the revolt of Magas is round about 278 B.C., and
thus about the same date as the Gallic attack on Delphi.

55. Translating kêri.

56. See note on Hymn iii. 171.

57. See note on Hymn ii. 4.

58. Apoll. Rhod. iv. 1300 f. hote kala naontos ep’ ophrusi Paktôloio kuknoi
kinêsôsin heon melos.

59. See note on Hymn ii. 59.

60. i.e. Cenchreae, one of the harbours of Corinth (“bimaris Corinthi”),
the other being Lechaeum.

61. In Arcadia.

62. The Hyperboreans, who suffered neither disease nor age (Pind. P. x. 41,
O. iii. 16; Hesiod fr. 209; Herod. iv. 32; Diodor. ii. 47; Strabo 341; Plin. N.H. iv. 89, vi.
34 and 55; Mela i. 12 f., iii. 36). There is a useful recent discussion by Otto Schroeder in Archiv f.
Religionswissenshaft, viii. (1904-5) p. 68 ff. The meaning o the name is much disputed. Pindar,
O. iii. 55, takes it to mean “the people behind Boreas,” the north wind. Modern suggestions
are huper + bora, hill, “the people over the hills,” or i.q. Perpherees,
Herod. iv. 33, cf. Hesych. perpheres. theôroi.

63. The version of Callimachus is that he offerings come from the Hyperboreans to Dodona, then
to Malis, then to Euboea, then to Delos. Hereodotus says the offerings came from the Hyperboreans to Scythia,
then from tribe to tribe till they reached the head of the Adriatic, thence to Dodona, then to Malis, to
Carystus in Euboea, then to Andros, then to Tenos, and thence to Delos. Pausanias, i. 31. 2, says the
Hyperboreans gave them to the Arimaspi, they to the Issedones, then the Scythians carried them to Sinope, then
they passed through Greece to Prasiae in Attica, and were then carried by the Athenians to Delos.

64. The famous Dôdônaion chalkeion (Suid. s.v., Steph. Byz.
s.v. Dôdônê, cf. Strabo, vii. fr. 3) is discussed by A. B. Cook, “The Gong at
Dodona”in J.H.S. xxii. (1902) p. 5 ff., who thinks the various allusions may be harmonized if we
assume that the original “gong” was the row of resonant tripods round the sacred enclosure, and that
later (say 4th century B.C.) these were replaced by a more elaborate gong consisting of two pillars, on one of
which was mounted the figure of a boy holding a whip formed of three chains tipped with buttons which, when
moved by the wind, beat upon a bronze lebês mounted upon the other pillar. Cf. Callim.
fr. 111.

65. In Boeotia.

66. For the Arimaspi see Herod. iv. 13 ff.

67. Prehistoric poet from Lycia (Xanthos is a river in Lycia); Herod. iv. 35 says he wrote the
hymn sung at Delphi in honour of the Hyperborean maidens. Cf. Paus. ix. 27. 2, Suid. s.v.
Ôlên.

68. The Minotaur.

69. Pasiphaë, daughter of Helios, wife of Minos, king of Crete.

70. The ship in which Theseus carried to Crete the seven maidens and seven boys as an offering
to the Minotaur. With the help of Ariadne, Theseus slew the monster (Plato, Phaedo, 58 b).

71. The Athenians, who vowed that if Theseus came safely home they would
send a theôria every year to Delos (Plato, l.c.).

72. “In Delos it was the custom to run round the altar of Apollo and to beat the altar
and, their hands tied behind their backs, to take a bite from the olive-tree.” (schol.).

73. Artemis.

HYMN V. ON THE BATH OF PALLAS

[1] All ye that are companions of the Bath of Pallas, come forth, come forth! I heard but now the snorting of
the sacred steeds, and the goddess is ready to go. Haste ye now, O fair-haired daughters of Pelasgus, haste!
Never did Athena wash her mighty arms before she drave the dust from the flanks of her horses – not even
when, her armour all defiled with filth, she returned from the battle of the lawless Giants; but far first she
loosed from the care her horses’ necks, and in the springs of Oceanus washed the flecks of sweat and from
their mouths that champed the bit cleansed the clotted foam.

[13] O come, daughters of Achaea, and bring not perfume nor alabasters1 (I hear
the voice of the axle-naves!); bring not, ye companions of the Bath, for Pallas perfume nor alabasters (for
Athena loves not mixed unguents), neither bring ye a mirror. Always her face is fair, and, even when the
Phrygian2 judged the strife on Ida, the great goddess looked not into
orichalc3 nor into the transparent eddy of Simois, nor did Hera. But Cypris took
the shining bronze and often altered and again altered the same lock.4 But Pallas,
after running twice sixty double courses, even as beside the Eurotas the Lacedaemonian Stars,5 took and skillfully anointed her with simple unguents, the birth of her own tree.
And, O maidens, the red blush arose on her, as the colour of the morning rose or seed of pomegranate. Wherefore
now also bring ye only the manly olive oil, wherewith Castor and wherewith Heracles anoint themselves. And bring
her a comb all of gold, that she may comb her hair, when she hath anointed her glossy tresses.

[33] Come forth, Athena! A company pleasing to thy heart awaits thee, the maiden daughters of Acestor’s
mighty sons.6 And therewithal, O Athena, is borne the shield of Diomedes, since
this is the Argive custom which in olden days Eumedes7 taught them: a priest who
found favour with thee: who on a time, when he knew that the people were plotting and planning death for him,
fled with thy holy image and dwelt in the Creion hill – dwelt on the hill of Creion and established thee,
O goddess, on the rugged rocks, whose name is now the Pallantid rocks.

[42] Come forth, Athena, Sacker of Cities, golden-helmeted, who rejoicest in the din of horse and shield.
Today, ye water-carriers, dip not your pitchers – today, O Argos, drink ye from the fountains and not from
the river; today, ye handmaidens carry your pitches to Physadeia,8 or
Amymone,9 daughter of Danaus. For, mingling his waters with gold and with flowers,
Inakhos will come from his pastoral hills, bringing fair water for the Bath of Athena. But beware, O Pelasgian,
lest even unwittingly thou behold the Queen. Whoso shall behold Pallas, Keeper of Cities, naked, shall look on
Argos for this the last time. Lady Athena, do thou come forth, and meanwhile I shall say somewhat unto these.
The story is not mine but told by others.

[57] Maidens, one nymph of old in Thebes did Athena love much, yea beyond all her companions, even the mother
of Teiresias, and was never apart from her. But when she drave her steeds towards ancient Thespiae or towards
Coroneia or to Haliartus, passing through the tilled fields of the Boeotians – or toward Coroneia where he
fragrant grove and altars are set by the river Coralius – often did the goddess set the nymph upon her car
and there was no dalliance of nymphs nor sweet ordering of dance, where Chariclo10
did not lead.

[68] Yet even her did many tears await in the after days, albeit she was a comrade pleasing to the heart of
Athena. One day those twain undid the buckles of their robes beside the fair-flowing Fountain of the Horse on
Helicon and bathed; and noontide quiet held all the hill. Those two ere bathing and it was the noontide hour and
a great quiet held that hill. Only Teiresias, on whose cheek the down was just darkening, still ranged with his
hounds the holy place. And, athirst beyond telling, he came unto the flowing fountain, wretched man! And
unwillingly saw that which is not lawful to be seen. And Athena was angered, yet said to him: “What god, O
son of Everes, led thee on this grievous way? Hence shalt thou never more take back thine eyes!”

[83] She spake and night seized the eyes of the youth. And he stood there speechless; for pain glued his knees
and helplessness stayed his voice. But the nymph cried: “What has thou done to my boy, lady? Is such the
friendship of you goddesses? Thou hast taken away the eyes of my son. Foolish child! Thou hast seen the breast
and body of Athena, but the sun thou shalt not see again. O me unhappy! O hill, O Helicon, where I may no more
come, surely a great price for little has been exacted. Losing a few gazelles and deer, thou hast taken the eyes
of my child.”

[93] Therewith the mother clasped her beloved child in both her arms and, wailing the heavy plain of the
mournful nightingale, led him away. And the goddess Athena pitied her comrade and spake to her and said:
“Noble lady, take back all the words that thou hast spoken in anger. It is not I that made thy child
blind. For no sweet thin is it for Athena to snatch away the eyes of children. But the laws of Cronius [Zeus]
order thus: Whosoever shall behold any of the immortals, when the god himself chooses not, at a heavy price
shall he behold. Noble lady, the thin that is done can no more be taken back; since thus the thread of the Fates
span when thou didst bear him from the first; but now, O son of Everes, take thou the issue which is due to
thee. How many burnt offerings shall the daughter of Cadmus11 burn in the days to
come? How many Aristaeus? – praying that they might see their only son, the young Actaeon,12 blind. And yet he shall be companion of the chase to great Artemis. But him neither
the chase nor comradeship in archery on the hills shall save in that hour, when, albeit unwillingly, he shall
behold the beauteous bath of the goddess. Nay, his own dogs shall then devour their former lord. And his mother
shall gather the bones of her son, ranging over all the thickets. Happiest of women shall she call thee and of
happy fate, for that thou didst receive thy son home from the hills – blind. Therefore, O comrade, lament
not; for to this thy son – for thy sake – shall remain many other honours from me. For I will make
him a seer to be sung of men hereafter, yea, more excellent than any other. He shall know the birds –
which is of good omen among all the countless birds that fly and what birds are of ill-omened flight. Many
oracles shall he utter to the Boeotians and many unto Cadmus, and to the mighty sons of Labdacus in later days.
Also will I give him a great staff which shall guide his feet as he hath need, and I will give him a long term
of life. And he only,13 when he dies, shall walk among the dead having
understanding, honoured of the great Leader of Peoples.14”

[130] So she spake and bowed her head; and that word is fulfilled over which Pallas bows; since to Athena only
among his daughters hath Zeus granted that she should win all things that belong to her sire, O companions of
the Bath, and no mother bare that goddess, but the head of Zeus. The head of Zeus bows not in falsehood, and in
falsehood his daughter hath no part.

[137] Now comes Athena in very deed. O maidens, whose task it is, receive ye the goddess with pious greeting
and with prayer, and with the voice of thanksgiving. Hail, goddess, and have thou Inachian Argos in thy keeping!
Hail when thou drivest forth thy steeds, and home again mayst thou drive them with joy, and do thou preserve all
the estate of the Danaans.

1. i.e. vessels made of alabaster, used especially to hold
perfumes, cf. N.T. Matt. xxvi. 7, Mark xiv. 3, Luke vii. 37; Theophrast. De odor. 41.

2. Paris.

3. First mentioned Hesiod, Shield 122, Hom. H. Aphr. 9. Already to Plato it
is only a name (to nun onomazomenon monon Critias 114 E, cf. schol. Apoll. Rh, iv. 973). Later
it was identified with the mixture of copper and zinc which the Romans called aurichalcum,
i.e. brass.

4. Tibull. i. 8. 22 “saepeque mutates disposuisse comas."

5. Castor and Pollux, known as stars to Eurip. Hel. 138 ff., etc.; their
identification with the constellation Gemini was comparatively late.

6. Akestoridan has been unjustly suspected. It is quite correct and is a mere
etymological variant for Arestoridan, since akesasthai = aresasthai. See Hesych.
s.v v.

7. “Once when the Heracleidae came against the Orestiadae, Eumedes, priest of Athena, was
suspected by the Argives of wishing to betray the Palladium to the Heracleidae. Eumedes, being afraid, took the
Palladium and came to the hill called Creion.” (schol.).

8. Spring at Argos. Cf. Steph. Byz. s.v. Asbôtis.

9. Spring at Argos. Cf. Apollod. ii. 1. 5, Strabo 368, Paus. ii. 37, etc.

10. Chariclo, wife of Eueres and mother of Teiresias.

11. Autonoë.

12. Actaeon, son of Aristaeus and Autonoë, was torn to pieces by his own dogs because he
had seen Artemis bathing in Parthenius in the Gargaphian valley. Apollod. iii. 4. 4., Nonn. v. 287 ff., Ovid,
Met. iii. 131 ff.

13. Hom. Od. x. 494 f.

14. Hades. The title Agesilaos, which was used of Hades by Aeschylus also (Athen, iii, 99 B),
refers to his character as host of the dead (hoi polloi, hoi pleiones) and is to be compared with his
titles Poludegmôn (Hom. H. Dem. 17, 31, 430), Poludektês (ib.
9), Polusênantôr (ib. 31), Pandokeus (Lycophr. 655).

HYMN VI. TO DEMETER

[1] As the Basket comes,1 greet it, ye women, saying “Demeter, greatly hail!
Lady of much bounty, of many measures of corn.” As the Basket comes, from the ground shall ye behold it,
ye uninitiated, and gaze not from the roof or from aloft – child nor wife nor maid hath shed her
hair2 – neither then nor when we spit from parched mouths fasting.3 Hesperus from the clouds marks the time of its coming: Hesperus, who alone persuaded
Demeter to drink, what time she pursued the unknown tracks of her stolen daughter.4

[9] Lady, how were thy feet able to carry thee unto the West, unto the black5 men
and where the golden apples6 are? Thou didst not drink nor dist thou eat during
that time nor didst thou wash. Thrice didst thou cross Achelous with his silver eddies, and as often didst thou
pass over each of the ever-flowing rivers, and thrice didst thou seat thee on the ground beside the fountain
Callichorus,7 parched and without drinking, and didst not eat nor wash.

[17] Nay, nay, let us not speak of that which brought the tear to Deo8! Better to
tell how she gave cities pleasing ordinances; better to tell how she was the first to cut straw and holy sheaves
of corn-ears and put in oxen to tread them, what time Triptolemus9 was taught the
good craft; better to tell – a warning to men that they avoid transgression – how (she made the son
of Triopas hateful and pitiful)10 to see.

[24] Not yet in the land of Cnidus,11 but sill in holy Dotium12 dwelt the Pelasgians and unto thyself they made a fair grove abounding in trees;
hardly would an arrow have passed through them. Therein was pine, and therein were mighty elms, and therein were
pear-trees, and therein were fair sweet-apples; and from the ditches gushes up water as it were of amber. And
the goddess loved the place to madness, even as Eleusis, as Triopum,13 as
Enna.14

[31] But when their favouring fortune became wroth with the Triopidae, then the worse counsel took hold of
Erysichthon.15 He hastened with twenty attendants, all in their prime, all
men-giants able to lift a whole city, arming them both with double axes and with hatchets, and they rushed
shameless into the grove of Demeter. Now there was a poplar, a great tree reaching to the sky, and thereby the
nymphs were wont to sport at noontide. This poplar was smitten first and cried a woeful cry to the others.
Demeter marked that her holy tree was in pain, and she as angered and said: “Who cuts down my fair
tree?” Straightway she likened her to Nicippe, whom the city had appointed to be her public priestess, and
in her hand she grasped her fillets and her poppy, and from her shoulder hung her key.16 And she spake to soothe the wicked and shameless man and said: “My child, who
cutest down the trees which are dedicated to the gods, stay, my child, child of thy parents’ many prayers,
cease and turn back thine attendants, lest the lady Demeter be angered, whose holy place thou makest
desolate.”

[50] But with a look more fierce than that wherewith a lioness looks on the hunter on the hills of
Tmarus17 – a lioness with new-born cubs,18
whose eye they say is of all most terrible – he said: “Vie back, lest I fix my great axe in thy
flesh! These trees shall make my tight dwelling wherein evermore I shall hold pleasing banquets enough for my
companions.” So spake the youth and Nemesis19 recorded his evil speech. And
Demeter was angered beyond telling and put on her goddess shape. Her steps touched the earth, but her head
reached unto Olympus.20 And they, half-dead when they beheld the lady goddess,
rushed suddenly away, leaving the bronze axes in the trees. And she left the others alone – for they
followed by constraint beneath their master’s hand – but she answered their angry king: “Yea,
yea, build thy house, dog, dog,21 that thou art, wherein thou shalt hold festival;
for frequent banquets shall be thine hereafter.” So much she said and devised evil things for Erysichthon.

[66] Straightway she sent on him a cruel and evil hunger – a burning hunger and a strong – and he
was tormented by a grievous disease. Wretched man, as much as he ate, so much did he desire again. Twenty
prepared the banquet for him, and twelve drew wine. For whatsoever things vex Demeter, vex also Dionysus; for
Dionysus shares the anger of Demeter. His parents for shame sent him not to common feast or banquet, and all
manner of excuse was devised. The sons of Ormenus22 came to bid him to the games
of Itonian Athene.23 Then his mother refused the bidding: “He is not at
home: for yesterday he is gone unto Crannon to demand a dept of a hundred oxen.” Polyxo24 came, mother of Actorion – for she was preparing a marriage for her child
– inviting both Triopas and his son. But the lady, heavy-hearted, answered with tears: “Triopas will
come, but Erysichthon a boar wounded on Pindus of fair glens and he hath lain abed for nine days.” Poor
child-loving mother, what falsehood didst thou not tell? One was giving a feast: “Erysichthon is
abroad.” One was brining home a bride: “A quoit hath struck Erysichthon,” or “he hath
had a fall from his car,” or “he is counting his flocks on Othrys.25” Then he within the house, an all-day banqueter, ate all things beyond
reckoning. But his evil belly leaped all the more as he ate, and all the eatables poured, in vain and
thanklessly, as it were into the depths of the sea. And even as the snow upon Mimas,26 as a wax doll in the sun, yea, even more that these he wasted to the very sinews:
only sinews and bones had the poor man left. His mother wept, and greatly groaned his two sisters, and the
breast that suckled him and the ten handmaidens over and over.

[96] And Triopas himself laid hands on his grey hairs, calling on Poseidon, who heeded not, with such words as
these: “False father, behold this the third generation of thy sons – if I am son of thee and of
Canace,27 daughter of Aeolus, and this hapless child is mine. Would that he had
been smitten by Apollo and that my hands had buried him! But now he sits an accursed glutton before mine
eyes.28 Either do thou remove from him his cruel disease or take and feed him
thyself; for my tables area already exhausted. Desolate are my folds and empty my byres of four-footed beasts;
for already the cooks29 have said me “no.”

[107] But even the mules they loosed from the great wains and he ate the heifer that his mother was feeding for
Hestia30 and the racing horse and the war charger, and the cat at which the little
vermin trembled.

[111] So long as there were stores in the house of Triopas, only the chambers of the house were aware of the
evil thing; but when his teeth dried up the rich house, then the king’s son sat at the crossways,31 begging for crusts and the cast out refuse of the feast. O Demeter, never may that
man be my friend who is hateful to thee, nor ever may he share party-wall with me; ill neighbours I abhor.

[118] Sing, ye maidens, and ye mothers, say with them: “Demeter, greatly hail! Lady of much bounty, of
many measures of corn.” And as the four white-haired horses convey the Basket, so unto us will the great
goddess of wide dominion come brining white spring and white harvest and winter and autumn, and keep us to
another year. And as unsandalled and with hair unbound we walk the city, so shall we have foot and head unharmed
for ever. And as the van-bearers bear vans32 full of gold, so may we get gold
unstinted. Far as the City Chambers let the uninitiated follow, but the initiated even unto the very shrine of
the goddess – as many as are under sixty years. But shoe that are heavy33
and she that stretches her hand to Eileithyia and she that is in pain – sufficient it is that they go so
far as their knees are able. And to them Deo shall give all things to overflowing, even as if they came unto her
temple.

[134] Hail, goddess, and save this people in harmony and in prosperity, and in the fields bring us all pleasant
things! Feed our kine, bring us flocks, bring us the corn-ear, bring us harvest! And nurse peace, that he who
sows may also reap. Be gracious, O thrice-prayed for, great Queen of goddesses!

THE END

1. kationtos might mean “comes home” but probably it is
safer to take it as “comes in procession.” Cf. kathodos Herondas i. 56.

2. i.e. dedicated on arriving at puberty. Or “hath her hair unbound,”
i.e. a maiden unwed. Cf. schol. Mêd’ êtis agamos esti. Scott,
Heart of Midlothian chap. 22, says of Effie Deans on her trial: “Her . . . tresses . . . which,
according to the custom of the country, unmarried women were not allowed to cover with any sort of cap, and
which, alas! Effie dared no longer confine with the snood or riband which implied purity of maiden fame, now
hung unbound.”

3. The second day of the Thesmophoria was a day of fasting, Nesteia.

4. Persephone.

5. The Aethiopians (schol.).

6. The garden of the Hesperides.

7. Callichorus, well (phrear) at Eleusis, Paus. i. 38. 6.

8. Demeter.

9. Son of Celeus, was taught agriculture by Demeter.

10. The lacuna is supplied in LM: <thêkato Triopidên echthon kai
oiktron>.

11. In Caria.

12. In Thessaly.

13. i.e. Triopium in Caria.

14. In Sicily.

15. Son of Triopas.

16. “As prestiess” (schol.).

17. Tmarus, mountain near Dodona in Epirus.

18. For strict sense of ômotokos see note on Hymn iv. 120. Here it is
no more than tokas “with cubs” as in Eur. Med. 187 tokadas dergma
leontos.

19. Nemesis takes note of presumptuous acts and words, Plato, Laws 717 D. Nonn.
Dion. i. 481 imitates Callimachus.

20. From Hom. Il. iv. 443 Eris ouranô estêrixe karê kai epi
chthoni bainei. Cf. Verg. A. iv. 177, x. 767, Nonn. xxix. 320.

21. Cf. AItia iii. 1. 4.

22. Eponymous king of Ormenion in Thessaly.

23. So called from her cult at Itone in Thessaly.

24. Unknown.

25. Mountain in Thessaly.

26. Hymn iv. 67 n.

27. Canace, daughter of Aeolus and Enarete, mother by Poseidon of Triopas (Diod. V. 61,
Apollod. i. 7, iii. 4).

28. This rendering, which takes boubrôstis as abstract for concrete, seems
better than “gluttony sits in his eyes.”

29. The Greek mageiros is butcher as well as cook.

30. At libations and sacrifices the first and last offerings were made to Hestia, the goddess
of the family hearth. Hence the proverb aph’ Hestias archesthai, which sometimes approaches the
sense of têr aph’ leras kinein, indicating a last desparate move, or something
thorough-going (cf. Germ. “von Hause aus.” Plato, Euthyphr. 3 A, etc.).

31. There seems to be a reference to the disposal of rubbish at the
crossways, Aesch. Cho. 97 with schol., and offerings made to Hecate there, Aristoph. Plut. 594
with schol. Harpocr. s.v. oxuthumia. It seems possible that Hecate’s name Eucoline is a euphemism
for Acoline (akolos).

32. likna, skull-shaped baskets, used for offering first-fruits to the gods
(cf. Hesych. s.v. leikna), also for winnowing corn and for cradles. Equivalent in Latin
vannus, whence our “van” and “fan.”

33. bareia has the ambiguous sense of heavy with age (Soph. O.T. 17) or
heavy with child – Lat. gravida.

SEARCH THEOI

CLASSICAL TEXTS LIBRARY

Aeschylus, Agamemnon

Aeschylus, Eumenides

Aeschylus, Libation Bearers

Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound

Aeschylus, Seven Against Thebes

Aeschylus, Suppliant Women

Aeschylus, Fragments

Alcman, Fragments

Apollodorus, The Library

Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica

Aratus of Soli, Phaenomena

Bion, Poems

Callimachus, Hymns

Callistratus, Descriptions

Claudian, Gigantomachia

Claudian, Rape of Proserpine

Clement, Exhortation to the Greeks

Clement, Recognitions

Colluthus, Rape of Helen

Dares Phrygius

Dictys Cretensis

Diodorus Siculus, Library of History

Epic Cycle Fragments

Fulgentius, Mythologies

Greek Lyric Fragments

Hesiod, Shield of Heracles

Hesiod, Theogony

Hesiod, Works and Days

Hesiod, Fragments

Homer, Iliad

Homer, Odyssey

Homeric Hymns

Hyginus, Astronomica

Hyginus, Fabulae

Lucian, Dialogues of the Dead

Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods

Lycophron, Alexandra

Moschus, Poems

Nonnus, Dionysiaca

Orphic Hymns

Ovid, Fasti

Ovid, Heroides

Ovid, Metamorphoses

Parthenius, Love Romances

Pattern Poems

Pausanias, Description of Greece

Philostratus the Elder, Imagines

Philostratus the Younger, Imagines

Plutarch, Life of Theseus

Plutarch, Parallel Stories

Quintus Smyrnaeus, Fall of Troy

Seneca, Agamemnon

Seneca, Hercules Furens

Seneca, Hercules Oetaeus

Seneca, Medea

Seneca, Oedipus

Seneca, Phaedra

Seneca, Phoenissae

Seneca, Thyestes

Seneca, Troades

Statius, Achilleid

Statius, Thebaid

Theocritus, Idylls

Tryphiodorus, Taking of Ilios

Tzetzes, Chiliades

Valerius Flaccus, Argonautica

Virgil, Aeneid

Virgil, Eclogues

Virgil, Georgics

RECENT ARTICLES

Who Was Achilles A Warrior?

What Were The 12 Labors of Hercules?

Gods, Spirits & Monsters A - Z

-->

.

Theoi Project © Copyright 2000 - 2017 Aaron J. Atsma, New Zealand

Contact Us
